update: Document Kotlin with AI (#5708)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/ai/ai-for-development.md

    Guide["<b>Guide the AI tool</b><br/>Kotlin AI skills"]
    Connect["<b>Connect to the IDE</b><br/>ACP, MCP server"]
    Implement["<b>Develop</b><br/>AI agent"]
    Review["<b>Review and refine</b><br/>AI agent"]
    Automate["<b>Automate</b><br/>JetBrains Air"]

    DefineTask --> Guide --> Connect --> Implement --> Review --> Automate
```

Different tools are useful at different stages of the workflow. The following sections describe each tool and when to use it.

## Develop in the IDE

IDEs can offer AI-powered features directly in your development environment. You can write, understand, modify, and review
Kotlin code without leaving the IDE.

### AI Assistant

The [AI Assistant](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22282-jetbrains-ai-assistant) provides AI-powered assistance 
directly in JetBrains IDEs, such as in [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/), and in [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio).
It's useful for interactive development tasks where you want to stay in control of each change.

The AI assistant provides:

* Context-aware AI chat using JetBrains, third-party, or local AI models.

> * Access to AI agents, including [Junie](https://www.jetbrains.com/junie/), Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and any third-party agents that support

Reviewer: I would put access to agents first instead of the chat.
Also, I wouldn't put Junie first in the list, but promote the idea that IntelliJ is an open platform that integrates with ANY agent of your choice: Claude, Codex, or any 3rd party agents that support Agent Client Protocol. Also you can use JetBrains Junie that is cost-optimized and especially well-integrated in JetBrains IDEs. 

Something like that

Instead of requiring a separate integration for every agent and editor combination, ACP defines a common protocol for
communication between AI agents and development tools.

JetBrains IDEs support ACP, allowing you to use compatible AI agents within your IDE. This is useful when you want flexibility
in choosing AI agents while working with Kotlin-aware IDE features such as navigation, inspections, refactoring, debugging,
and project analysis.

The ACP registry provides access to multiple agents, including Claude Agent, Cursor, GitHub Copilot, OpenCode, and others.
See the full list of supported agents in the [ACP registry](https://agentclientprotocol.com/get-started/registry).

## Use AI agents

AI agents can perform development tasks with less direct guidance than interactive AI assistants. For example, they
can explore a project, plan implementation steps, modify multiple files, or run commands and tests.

> If you're not sure which AI agent to use, check the [Kotlin Benchmark](https://kotlinlang.org/benchmark/) to compare how different agents perform on Kotlin
> development tasks.
> 
{style="tip"}

> ### Junie

Reviewer 2: can we add svg logo here?

Author: It's technical content, so we don't add logos :(

> [Junie](https://www.jetbrains.com/junie/) is a JetBrains AI agent. You can use Junie [in JetBrains IDEs and Android Studio](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/26104-junie-the-ai-coding-agent-by-jetbrains),

Reviewer 2: https://junie.jetbrains.com/

and project-specific expectations. Skills help AI agents perform tasks such as writing Kotlin code, explaining language
features, generating documentation, creating tests, reviewing code, or applying migration guidance.

Kotlin AI skills can be used with different agents and workflows, including IDE-based agents,
command-line agents, and external AI tools that support reusable instructions.

Learn more about [](kotlin-ai-skills.md).

### Kotlin-specific acceptance criteria

Kotlin Multiplatform projects in particular are complex enough for agents to lose track of the entire project structure
and consequences of specific changes.

To help your agent, include the following as your general ([AGENTS.md](https://agents.md/))
or task-specific success criteria:

* Run target-specific tests after introducing changes whenever such tests are available. 
* Verify that all configured KMP targets successfully build before considering a task complete. 
* Review the implementation for platform-specific APIs leaking into common code
  to avoid agents (or humans) accidentally using these APIs in common code later on.

## Manage AI agents

> 
> Development teams need more than one AI agent to work effectively. They may need to coordinate multiple agents, automate
> recurring tasks, monitor agent activity, or evaluate different tools before deciding to adopt them.
> The following tools support AI-assisted development beyond individual coding sessions.
> 
> ### JetBrains Air
> 
> [JetBrains Air](https://air.dev/) is an agentic development environment for delegating coding tasks to multiple AI agents
> and running them concurrently. Air is available:
> 
> * As an IDE on your desktop, for interactive, agent-driven development locally or in an isolated environment.
> * For organizations, on the web as a way to manage automated development workflows in remote cloud environments.
> 
> Use JetBrains Air when you want several agents to work on tasks at the same time while keeping each task isolated from
> the main codebase. This is useful for experimentation, parallel implementation attempts, comparing agent output, or 
> assigning different tasks to different agents.
> 
> Learn more about [JetBrains Air](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/air/getting-started.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[JetBrains Air](https://air.dev/) is an agentic development environment for delegating coding tasks to AI agents. It lets you provide context for each task, choose the agent, model, and execution environment, and review or refine the resulting changes before deciding what to apply or merge.

Tasks can run in your local workspace, an isolated Git worktree or Docker container, or – for developers in eligible organizations – in a JetBrains-managed cloud environment. You can continue coding or run several independent tasks in parallel while the agents work.

You can work with Air through:

- **Air Desktop** – Run local and cloud tasks.
- **Air web** – Run and manage cloud tasks and automations from a browser.
- **AI Assistant in IntelliJ-based IDEs** – Start and continue cloud tasks without leaving your IDE. You can open the same tasks in Air Desktop or Air web.

Cloud tasks are currently available in Preview to developers in eligible organizations. See [Run tasks in cloud](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/air/run-tasks-in-cloud.html) for eligibility requirements and current limitations.

Use Air when you want to hand off a well-scoped coding task, isolate agent changes from your local working copy, run independent tasks in parallel, or turn a repeatable task into a scheduled or event-triggered automation.

Learn more about [JetBrains Air](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/air/getting-started.html).
```

> [//]: # (title: AI tools for Kotlin development)

Reviewer 4: Should mention kotlin-toolchain and kotlin lsp?
Since such tools are currently being created and developed specifically for agents.
For example, Google clearly positions its android cli as a tool for agents

Author: I don't think so:
* Kotlin toolchain is still in Alpha
* Kotlin LSP is the behind the scenes tool + Android cli provides agents with skills

Reviewer 4: I don't see anything bad that this is still in alpha. Especially since we talked about them at the kotlin conf. This kind of tooling is necessary for agents in current development

AI-powered tools can assist with many Kotlin development tasks. They can generate and explain code, implement
features, create tests, review changes, refactor existing code, and automate recurring development tasks.

The Kotlin ecosystem includes tools for interactive development, AI agents, and large-scale agent orchestration.
Depending on your workflow, you can:

* [](#develop-in-the-ide): Use AI features directly in IDEs such as IntelliJ IDEA and Android Studio.
* [Work with AI agents](#use-ai-agents): Choose an AI agent such as Junie or a third-party agent and improve its Kotlin expertise
with Kotlin AI skills.
* [Manage and scale AI development](#manage-ai-agents): Coordinate interactive and automated agent workflows.

```mermaid
graph LR
    DefineTask["<b>Define the task</b><br/>AI agent</br>"]
    Guide["<b>Guide the AI tool</b><br/>Kotlin AI skills"]
    Connect["<b>Connect to the IDE</b><br/>ACP, MCP server"]
    Implement["<b>Develop</b><br/>AI agent"]
    Review["<b>Review and refine</b><br/>AI agent"]
    Automate["<b>Automate</b><br/>JetBrains Air"]

    DefineTask --> Guide --> Connect --> Implement --> Review --> Automate

> ```

Reviewer 4: This diagram is rendering poorly for me. I was looking at it on a widescreen monitor

<img width="912" height="130" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7779b232-e3d1-44a8-a7b6-2a0f425e43b3" />

Author: thanks, fixed

Different tools are useful at different stages of the workflow. The following sections describe each tool and when to use it.

## Develop in the IDE

IDEs can offer AI-powered features directly in your development environment. You can write, understand, modify, and review
Kotlin code without leaving the IDE.

### AI Assistant

The [AI Assistant](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22282-jetbrains-ai-assistant) provides AI-powered assistance 
directly in JetBrains IDEs, such as in [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/), and in [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio).
It's useful for interactive development tasks where you want to stay in control of each change.

The AI assistant provides:

* Access to AI agents, including [Junie](https://www.jetbrains.com/junie/), Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and any third-party agents that support 
the [Agent Client Protocol](#agent-client-protocol).
* Context-aware AI chat using JetBrains, third-party, or local AI models.

> * AI-assisted code completion and next step suggestions.

Reviewer 4: and connect your mcp servers?

Reviewer 4: not sure about it

JetBrains IDEs support ACP, allowing you to use compatible AI agents within your IDE. This is useful when you want flexibility
in choosing AI agents while working with Kotlin-aware IDE features such as navigation, inspections, refactoring, debugging,
and project analysis.

The ACP registry provides access to multiple agents, including Claude Agent, Cursor, GitHub Copilot, OpenCode, and others.
See the full list of supported agents in the [ACP registry](https://agentclientprotocol.com/get-started/registry).

## Use AI agents

AI agents can perform development tasks with less direct guidance than interactive AI assistants. For example, they
can explore a project, plan implementation steps, modify multiple files, or run commands and tests.

> If you're not sure which AI agent to use, check the [Kotlin Benchmark](https://kotlinlang.org/benchmark/) to compare how different agents perform on Kotlin
> development tasks.
> 
{style="tip"}

### Junie

[Junie](https://junie.jetbrains.com/) is a JetBrains AI agent. You can use Junie [in JetBrains IDEs and Android Studio](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/26104-junie-the-ai-coding-agent-by-jetbrains),

> [from your terminal](https://junie.jetbrains.com/docs/junie-cli.html), or [in headless mode](https://junie.jetbrains.com/docs/junie-headless.html) in CI/CD scripts.

Reviewer 4: maybe should mention GitHub Actions? Like base word for searching
https://junie.jetbrains.com/docs/junie-on-github.html?_gl=1%2A1ytp9jj%2A_gcl_au%2AMjExODQ2NDgwNi4xNzg1OTYwOTE3%2A_ga%2AMTE0ODMzNzM5MS4xNzQ4ODkwNTYz%2A_ga_9J976DJZ68%2AczE3ODU5NjA5MTYkbzEzJGcxJHQxNzg1OTYyMjk4JGo2MCRsMCRoMA..

Junie is designed for tasks that require more than a single code suggestion or chat response. Use Junie for development
tasks that involve multiple files or require planning and execution. You can ask it to implement a feature, update code
across multiple files, add tests, or perform maintenance work.

When Junie runs in an IDE, it can also use IDE capabilities such as project indexing, code navigation, inspections,
refactorings, debugging, and framework-aware project analysis.

Learn more about [Junie](https://junie.jetbrains.com/docs/get-started-with-junie.html).

### Third-party AI agents

Many third-party AI development tools support Kotlin. They are available as IDE extensions, standalone editors, command-line tools,
and cloud-based development environments. For example:

* GitHub Copilot

> * Google Gemini

Reviewer 4: I don't know how it is called now. I heard about "[Google Antigravity](https://antigravity.google/)"

Author: we listed just the most popular ones here

Reviewer 4: I mean, the "antigravity" name replaced "gemini"

Author: But  "antigravity" is more of a platform, rather than an agent, no? And we still have Gemini Cli in IDE
<img width="230" height="126" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2e23f9b0-fdd4-45f7-b2f5-74d56e320efb" />

Reviewer 4: oh, okay
Google's renaming is hard for me)

You can use third-party tools independently or connect compatible agents to JetBrains IDEs through [ACP](#agent-client-protocol).

### MCP servers

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) connects AI models to external data sources, tools, and systems.
JetBrains maintains several MCP servers that can make your Kotlin experience more productive:

* The [JetBrains IDE MCP server](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/26071-mcp-server) exposes IDE capabilities.
  Using the server, an AI agent can use IDE features such as project indexing, code navigation, refactoring, inspections, and build execution.
  This gives the agent a better understanding of your Kotlin project as well as more efficient means of generating and evaluating code.
* For Kotlin Multiplatform projects, the [klibs.io MCP server](https://github.com/JetBrains/klibs-io/blob/master/integrations/mcp/README.md)
  helps agents access the catalog of available multiplatform libraries to more efficiently look for existing solutions.
* For Compose Multiplatform projects, the [Compose Hot Reload MCP server](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform/compose-hot-reload.html#mcp-server-for-ai-agents)

>   allows agents to directly interact with the reloadable app (trigger reloads, take screenshots, read semantic trees, and so on).

Reviewer 4: I think the problem here is that there are too many links, and I have to click through them to find information. For klibs, it's just an md file on github
Maybe you can add a config to each server, so it's clear how to add it. And could hide the config in a collapse block so it doesn't get in the way while viewing

Author: This page is intended to act as a landing hub, where people can find what we provide and then use the links to see more information on the ones they are interested in. I don't want to add instructions here, because they can become stale pretty quickly (we don't support those projects, and may be unaware that something has changed)

Reviewer 4: I didn't mean the instructions, only the config. It seems more stable, and it also makes it easier for agents to get information

Use Kotlin AI skills when you want to guide an agent toward idiomatic Kotlin patterns, Kotlin coding conventions,
and project-specific expectations. Skills help AI agents perform tasks such as writing Kotlin code, explaining language
features, generating documentation, creating tests, reviewing code, or applying migration guidance.

Kotlin AI skills can be used with different agents and workflows, including IDE-based agents,
command-line agents, and external AI tools that support reusable instructions.

Learn more about [](kotlin-ai-skills.md).

### Kotlin-specific acceptance criteria

Kotlin Multiplatform projects in particular are complex enough for agents to lose track of the entire project structure
and consequences of specific changes.

To help your agent, include the following as your general ([AGENTS.md](https://agents.md/))
or task-specific success criteria:

* Run target-specific tests after introducing changes whenever such tests are available. 
* Verify that all configured KMP targets successfully build before considering a task complete. 
* Review the implementation for platform-specific APIs leaking into common code

>   to avoid agents (or humans) accidentally using these APIs in common code later on.

Reviewer 4: This is probably a useful topic,
but in my opinion, we should be more careful here. For example, checking that all targets are built is often not the best criterion due to the high cost of runs, time, and sometimes the impossibility of building all targets outside CI/CD

Author: Good point, thanks! I've changed the wording slightly to ease it up a little:)

## Manage AI agents

Development teams need more than one AI agent to work effectively. They may need to coordinate multiple agents, automate
recurring tasks, monitor agent activity, or evaluate different tools before deciding to adopt them.
The following tools support AI-assisted development beyond individual coding sessions.

> ### JetBrains Air

Reviewer 4: I didn't see any mention of Air in other sections, like the overview. Is this intentional?

* [Work with AI agents](#use-ai-agents): Choose an AI agent such as Junie or a third-party agent and improve its Kotlin expertise
with Kotlin AI skills.
* [Manage and scale AI development](#manage-ai-agents): Coordinate interactive and automated agent workflows.

```mermaid
graph LR
    DefineTask["**Define the task**
        AI agent"]
    Guide["**Guide the AI tool**
        Kotlin AI skills"]
    Connect["**Connect to the IDE**
        ACP, MCP server"]
    Implement["**Develop**
        AI agent"]
    Review["**Review and refine**
        AI agent"]
    Automate["**Automate**
        JetBrains Air"]

    DefineTask --> Guide --> Connect --> Implement --> Review --> Automate

    classDef largeNode font-size:18px;
    class DefineTask,Guide,Connect,Implement,Review,Automate largeNode;
```

Different tools are useful at different stages of the workflow. The following sections describe each tool and when to use it.

## Develop in the IDE

IDEs can offer AI-powered features directly in your development environment. You can write, understand, modify, and review
Kotlin code without leaving the IDE.

### AI Assistant

> The [AI Assistant](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22282-jetbrains-ai-assistant) provides AI-powered assistance 

Reviewer 5: I believe since AI Assistant is a product name, the "The" article can be dropped.

directly in JetBrains IDEs, such as in [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/), and in [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio).
It's useful for interactive development tasks where you want to stay in control of each change.

The AI assistant provides:

* Access to AI agents, including [Junie](https://www.jetbrains.com/junie/), Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and any third-party agents that support 
the [Agent Client Protocol](#agent-client-protocol).

> * Context-aware AI chat using JetBrains, third-party, or local AI models.

Reviewer 5: Saying "using JetBrains...models" reads like we have our own LLMs, which is not really the case. The JetBrains AI service used for AI Assistant routes user requests to models from third-party AI providers (https://www.jetbrains.com/legal/docs/terms/jetbrains-ai/service-providers/). I'd rework the sentence as follows:
"Context-aware AI chat using models from cloud providers, such as Google Gemini, OpenAI, and Anthropic, as well as your own local models."

Reviewer 6: I like the reworked sentence! But should we focus on the cloud providers or the models?
For example:
"Context-aware AI chat using models from cloud providers, such as Google, OpenAI, and Anthropic, as well as your own local models."
Or:
"Context-aware AI chat using cloud-hosted models, such as Gemini, GPT, and Claude, as well as your own local models."

Reviewer 5: Actually, I think your suggestion is much better! Yes, let's shift the focus to models instead of providers.

Reviewer 6: Great! I updated the text.

> * AI-assisted code completion and next step suggestions.

Reviewer 5: The feature is called Next Edit Suggestions, I think it is better to refer it like this:
"AI-assisted code completion and next edit suggestions."

> Learn more about [AI assistant integration with JetBrains IDEs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/ai-assistant-in-jetbrains-ides.html).

Reviewer 5: This link points to the placeholder page in IDEA's docs. While not incorrect, maybe it makes sense to reference the actual AI Assistant documentation here? https://www.jetbrains.com/help/ai-assistant/about-ai-assistant.html

Reviewer 6: Good point! Added!

### JetBrains Air

[JetBrains Air](https://air.dev/) is the Agentic Development Environment (ADE) for engineering teams building products with AI.
With Air, you can provide context for each task, choose the agent, model, and execution environment, and then review or
refine the resulting changes before applying them to your code.

Use Air when you want to delegate a defined coding task to an AI agent, isolate AI-generated changes from your local working copy,
run multiple implementation tasks in parallel, or turn recurring development tasks into scheduled or event-driven automations.
You can run tasks in your local workspace, isolated Git worktree or Docker container, and JetBrains-managed cloud environment.

You can work with JetBrains Air through:

* **Air Desktop** – Run local and cloud tasks from a desktop application.
* **Air Web** – Run, monitor, and manage cloud tasks and automations from a web browser.
* **AI Assistant in IntelliJ-based IDEs** – Start and monitor cloud tasks without leaving your IDE. Work with the same tasks in Air Desktop or
Air Web.

Learn more about [JetBrains Air](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/air/getting-started.html).

> ### JetBrains Central

Reviewer 7: To make the messaging clear, JetBrains Central is not a tool. It is the underlying control and execution plane, a platform for agentic software development within an organization. JetBrains Central Console is the administrative web UI for AI governance within Central on the organization level. In fact, we almost don't mention JetBrains Central on its landing page) we call the offering "AI for teams and organization": https://www.jetbrains.com/agentic-software-development/

It is mentioned in the very first blog post about it: https://blog.jetbrains.com/blog/2026/03/24/introducing-jetbrains-central-an-open-system-for-agentic-software-development/

You are linking (why twice?) to the Console documentation, which mentions what Central is, but is not about Central.

I'd maybe phrase it differently here:
- First, explain what JetBrains Central is (with a link to the landing page)
- Then, how JetBrains Central Console is the web UI for organizations to govern, manage, monitor, analyze, and control AI usage through Central

Let me know if you need a second pass, or I can suggest something.

Reviewer 6: Thank you for such clear feedback! I changed the text to the version we agreed in Slack.
